=head1 NAME

ExtUtils::XSpp - XS for C++

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  xspp [--typemap=typemap.xsp [--typemap=typemap2.xsp]]
       [--xsubpp[=/path/to/xsubpp] [--xsubpp-args="xsubpp args"]
       Foo.xsp

or

  perl -MExtUtils::XSpp::Cmd -e xspp -- <xspp options and arguments>

In Foo.xs

  INCLUDE_COMMAND: $^X -MExtUtils::XSpp::Cmd -e xspp -- <xspp options/arguments>

Using C<ExtUtils::XSpp::Cmd> is equivalent to using the C<xspp>
command line script, except that there is no guarantee for C<xspp> to
be installed in the system PATH.

=head1 OVERVIEW

XS++ is just a thin layer over plain XS, hence to use it you
are supposed to know, at the very least, C++ and XS.

This means that you will need typemaps for B<both> the normal XS
pre-processor I<xsubpp> and the XS++ pre-processor I<xspp>.

=head1 COMMAND LINE

=head2 C<--typemap=/path/to/typemap.xsp>

Can be specified multiple times to process additional typemap files
before the main XS++ input files.  Typemap files are processed the
same way as regular XS++ files, except that output code is discarded.

=head2 C<--xsubpp[=/path/to/xsubpp]>

If specified, XS++ will run F<xsubpp> after processing the XS++ input
file.  If the path to F<xsubpp> is not specified, F<xspp> expects to
find it in the system PATH.

=head2 C<--xsubpp-args="extra xsubpp args">

Can be used to pass additional command line arguments to F<xsubpp>.

=head1 TYPEMAPS

There is nothing special about typemap files (i.e. you can put typemaps
directly in your .xsp file), but it is handy to have common typemaps in a
separate file, to avoid duplication.

  %typemap{<C++ type>}{simple};

Just let XS++ know that this is a valid type, the type will be passed
unchanged to XS code B<except> that any C<const> qualifiers will be
stripped.

  %typemap{<C++ reference type>}{reference};

Handle C++ references: the XS variable will be declared as a pointer,
and it will be explicitly dereferenced in the function call. If it is
used in the return value, the function will create B<copy> of the
returned value using a copy constructor.

As a shortcut for the common case of declaring both of the above
for a given type, you may use

  %typemap{<C++ type>};

Which has the same effect as:

  %typemap{<C++ type>}{simple};
  %typemap{<C++ type>&}{reference};

For more control over the type mapping, you can use the C<parsed>
variant as follows.

  %typemap{<C++ type 1>}{parsed}{%<C++ type 2>%};

When C<C++ type 1> is used, replace it with C<C++ type 2> in the
generated XS code.

  %typemap{<C++ type>}{parsed}{
      %cpp_type{%<C++ type 2>%};
      %call_function_code{% $CVar = new Foo( $Call ) %};
      %cleanup_code{% ... %};
      %precall_code{% ... %};

      # use only one of the following
      %output_code{% $PerlVar = newSViv( $CVar ) %};
      %output_list{% PUTBACK; XPUSHi( $CVar ); SPAGAIN %};
  };

Is a more flexible form for the C<parsed> typemap.  All the parameters
are optional.

=over 4

=item cpp_type

Specifies the C++ type used for the variable declaration in the
generated XS code.

If not specified defaults to the type specified in the typemap.

=item call_function_code

Used when the typemap applies to the return value of the function.

Specifies the code to use in the function call.  The special variables
C<$Call> and C<$CVar> are replaced with the actual call code and the name of
the C++ return variable.

=item output_code

Used when the typemap applies to the return value of the function.
See also C<%output_list>.

Specifies the code emitted right after the function call to convert
the C++ return value into a Perl return value.  The special variable
C<$CVar> is replaced with the C++ return variable name.

=item cleanup_code

Used when the typemap applies to the return value of the function.

Specifies some code emitted after output value processing.  The
special variables C<$PerlVar> and C<$CVar> are replaced with the names of the
C++ variables containing the Perl scalar and the corresponding C++
value.

=item precall_code

Used when the typemap applies to a parameter.

Specifies some code emitted after argument processing and before
calling the C++ method.  The special variables C<$PerlVar> and C<$CVar> are
replaced with the names of the C++ variables containing the Perl
scalar and the corresponding C++ value.

=item output_list

Used when the typemap applies to the return value of the function, as
an alternative to C<%output_code>.

Specifies some code that manipulates the Perl stack directly in order
to return a list.  The special variable C<$CVar> is replaced with the C++
name of the output variable.

The code must use PUTBACK/SPAGAIN if appropriate.

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Anything that does not look like a XS++ directive or a class
declaration is passed verbatim to XS. If you want XS++ to ignore code
that looks like a XS++ directive or class declaration, simply surround it with
a raw block delimiter like this:

  %{
  XS++ won't interpret this
  %}

=head2 %code

See under B<Classes>. Note that custom C<%code> blocks are the only
exception to the exception handling. By specifying a custom C<%code>
block, you forgo the automatic exception handlers.

=head2 %file

  %file{file/path.h};
  ...
  %file{file/path2};
  ...
  %file{-}

By default XS++ output goes to standard output; to change this, use the
C<%file> directive; use C<-> for standard output.

=head2 %module

  %module{Module__Name};

Will be used to generate the C<MODULE=Module__Name> XS directives.

=head2 %name

  %name{Perl::Class} class MyClass { ... };
  %name{Perl::Func} int foo();

Specifies the perl name under which the C++ class/function will be
accessible.

=head2 %typemap

See B<TYPEMAPS> above.

=head2 %length

When you need to pass a string from Perl to an XSUB that
takes the C string and its length as arguments,
you may have XS++ pass the length of the string automatically.
For example, if you declare a method as follows,

  void PrintLine( char* line, unsigned int %length{line} );

you can call the method from Perl like this:

  $object->PrintLine( $string );

This feature is also present in plain XS. See also: L<perlxs>.

If you use C<%length(line)> in conjunction with any kind of
special code block such as C<%code>, C<%postcall>, etc.,
then you can refer to the length of the string
(here: C<line>) I<efficiently> as C<length(line)> in the code.

=head2 Classes

  %name{My::Class} class MyClass : public %name{My::Base} MyBase
  {
      // can be called in Perl as My::Class->new( ... );
      MyClass( int arg );
      // My::Class->newMyClass( ... );
      %name{newMyClass} MyClass( const char* str, int arg );

      // standard DESTROY method
      ~MyClass();

      int GetInt();
      void SetValue( int arg = -1 );

      %name{SetString} void SetValue( const char* string = NULL );

      // Supply a C<CODE:> or C<CLEANUP:> block for the XS
      int MyMethod( int a, int b )
          %code{% RETVAL = a + b; %}
          %cleanup{% /* do something */ %};
  };

=head2 Comments

XS++ recognizes both C-style comments C</* ... */> and C++-style
comments C<// ...>.  Comments are removed from the XS output.

=head2 Exceptions

C++ Exceptions are always caught and transformed to Perl C<croak()>
calls. If the exception that was caught inherited from C<std::exception>,
then the C<what()> message is included in the Perl-level error message.
All other exceptions will result in the C<croak()> message
C<"Caught unhandled C++ exception of unknown type">.

Note that if you supply a custom C<%code> block for a function or method,
the automatic exception handling is turned off.

=head1 EXAMPLES

The distribution contains an F<examples> directory. The
F<examples/XSpp-Example> directory therein demonstrates
a particularly simple way of getting started with XS++.

=head1 AUTHOR

Mattia Barbon <mbarbon@cpan.org>

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut

# local variables:
# mode: cperl
# end:
